From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
[music] Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> For weeks, President Trump has been
ratcheting up tensions across the world
by claiming he [music] would stop at
nothing in his quest to seize Greenland
from Denmark.
Then on [music] Wednesday, Trump
appeared to back down, announcing that
he'd agreed, at least for now, to an
off-ramp.
>> [music]
>> Today, my colleague Mark Landler on the
dizzying ups and downs of Trump's
Greenland gambit, and why this whole
[music] saga may mark the beginning of a
new world order.
It's Thursday,
>> [music]
>> January 22nd.
Mark, what a week this has been. Welcome
to The Daily. Thanks. It's great to be
back. So, in the last couple of days,
we've seen this incredible pressure
build over Trump's desire and stated
intention to take over Greenland. And
then, just today, Wednesday, we got this
announcement that Trump and NATO had
reached some kind of framework for a
deal.
And we don't know all that much about
it, but just orient us. What do we know?
Well,
you know, as you said, we don't know a
great deal. There appears to be the
outlines of an agreement under which the
US would perhaps be granted some form of
ownership or sovereignty, if you will,
over small pockets of land in Greenland,
probably US military bases. And it
appears that that would be something
that would allow President Trump to
claim what he has wanted all along,
which is some American ownership of
Greenland. While for the Danish
government, maintaining the reality of
the situation, which is that this is
Danish territory. So, it appears to be
something that Mark Rutte, the NATO
Secretary General, is trying to craft
that will somehow mollify Trump while
sort of preserving Denmark's claim over
over Greenland, which was shaping up to
be an unbreakable conflict between the
United States and Denmark. How it all
shakes out, very unclear. For those of
us that have covered Trump in the past,
we know that these dramas tend to have
multiple acts, and what you find out in
act one often changes radically into act
two and act three. But, it does appear,
on the face of it, that the Europeans
have managed to edge Trump away from,
you know, a rather dangerous cliff edge
on this whole issue.
And the upshot is, at least as far as we
know for now, that they've reached some
kind of agreement that falls way short
of the United States owning all of
Greenland. But, there is some kind of
compromise that's been made.
So, it's been a head-spinning day. It's
been a head-spinning week. Let's talk
about how we got to this point. Why does
Trump want Greenland so badly?
Can you explain that?
Well, I guess I would answer that on two
levels. I think Donald Trump wants
Greenland, in a sense, coming from his
background as a real estate developer.
He wants to acquire territory for the
United States. Greenland would be a
larger new acquisition for the United
States in square miles than the
Louisiana Purchase, than Alaska, than
some of the other major expansions of
the United States. So, that's on a very
visceral level. It's simply about
expanding the footprint of the country
while he is president.
>> Right. But, there's also a more
strategic argument here, and that
argument is that Greenland sits in a
very contested part of the world, in the
Arctic. It sits atop these very valuable
minerals known as rare earth minerals.
For that reason, other countries are
going to become increasingly interested
in Greenland, uh the Russians, the
Chinese. And Trump's argument, in short,
is we need Greenland. We need Greenland
as a frontline place to protect US
national security. We need Greenland
because we want to exploit its mineral
riches, and we can't do any of that
unless we actually own it. It's not just
enough to have a military base there,
which the United States does have. We
need to be the owners in order to get
the full advantage of the protection of
Greenland, to be able to exploit it
economically.
And is he right, Mark, that owning
Greenland would somehow secure all of
these new benefits?
Well, the point is, the US could already
obtain virtually all of these benefits
under the existing arrangement between
the United States and Denmark. A 1951
treaty gives the US a great deal of
flexibility to expand its military
facilities on the island. So, President
Trump's argument is, you're never going
to defend something if it's a license
agreement, which is the way he
characterizes our current arrangement in
Greenland. But, the truth is, we could
build up our military footprint on
Greenland a great deal under the
existing arrangement, and furthermore,
the Danes would welcome that. The Danish
government has said, over and over
again, we are willing to have
discussions with the United States. We
would welcome greater involvement, not
just military, but commercial. So, I
think the president is not quite right
when he makes this argument. Right,
which is why when Trump originally
started talking about owning Greenland,
people really didn't take him seriously,
right? It seemed like the US already had
this access to Greenland, and taking it
over was either a joke or a completely
empty threat. But then, obviously, that
changed.
Yeah, I think that's right, and I think
that there was one specific event that
happened that changed the calculations
of a lot of people. And that was the
military operation in Venezuela, in
which the president, Nicolas Maduro, was
removed by American military forces and
taken to the United States to face
criminal drug trafficking charges. I
think that event, more than any other
single thing, caused a lot of people to
sit up and say, "Hey, wait a minute.
When he's talking about Greenland, he's
actually serious."
>> [music]
>> For the United States to secure the
Arctic region, to protect and defend
NATO and NATO interests, obviously,
Greenland should be part of the United
States. You had a number of the
president's advisers, memorably Stephen
Miller, go on TV and kind of make the
point this flexing of muscle is
something that the world should expect
to see from the United States elsewhere.
Nobody's going to fight the United
States militarily over the future of
Greenland.
We need Greenland for national security.
And in effect, this [music] brute
philosophy of might makes right started
being widely broadcast by the president
himself. Ownership is
very important, you know. Why is
ownership important here? Because it's
what I feel is psychologically needed
for
success.
And so, Europeans are suddenly extremely
worried. We had what I would describe as
a frank, but also constructive,
discussion. The Danes send officials,
along with Greenland officials, to meet
with President Trump's aides at the
White House to try to work out some sort
of a compromise. The president has made
his view clear.
And we have a different position. They
leave empty-handed. Denmark's now
boosting its military presence on this
strategically located island, along with
allies from France, Germany, Norway, and
Sweden.
>> You have NATO allies of Denmark, France,
and the United Kingdom pledging to send
small numbers of troops to Greenland as
a show of solidarity. Things are really
ratcheting up. Things are really
ratcheting up, and suddenly this is a a
genuine full-blown crisis. And at that
point, President Trump reenters the fray
very directly and says to Europe,
>> A new threat from President Trump in the
standoff over Greenland. The president
says he'll impose a 10% tariff on
Denmark, and
>> if you're not willing to back off, I
will reopen the trade deals that I made
with each of your countries and with the
European Union, and slap [music] new
tariffs on top of the existing tariffs.
And so, what had been a diplomatic and
geopolitical crisis now is also a
full-blown economic crisis.
>> [music]
>> And that brings us to this week, to
Davos, where world leaders and business
leaders had assembled for their annual
meeting in the Swiss Alps. This is
something they do every year, but now,
this year, there are these enormous
stakes bearing down on this meeting. And
Trump arrives Wednesday morning to
deliver a speech that everyone was
waiting to hear, with the real sense
that the future of America's
relationship with Europe, with Canada,
with some of our closest allies was
hanging in the balance here.
I watched the speech. I know you did,
too. So, what struck you the most about
it?
Well, if the hope of the people waiting
in that room was to be reassured, I
think that President Trump let them down
quickly, and let them down pretty hard.
Would you like me to say a few words of
Greenland?
I was going to leave it out of the
speech, but I thought I think I would
have been reviewed very negatively.
This was Trump at his [music] most
swaggering, his most menacing, really
delivering in perhaps [music] the purest
form we've seen a message that he's been
articulating for months, that this is a
world in which the strong survive and
the weak have to learn how to deal with
it.
And the fact is no nation or group of
nations is in any position to be able to
secure Greenland other than the United
States. He said he wants Greenland. He
wants the United States
>> [music]
>> to take ownership and control of
Greenland.
>> We probably won't get anything unless I
decide to use excessive strength and
force
where we would be frankly unstoppable.
But
I won't do that. But notably, he also
took military action off the table. It's
the United States alone that can protect
this giant mass of land, this giant
piece of ice, develop it and improve it
and
>> So he came in and at one level he said,
"Look, I'm not going to use force to
take over this huge hunk of ice in the
North Atlantic." And that's the reason
I'm seeking immediate negotiations to
once again discuss the acquisition of
Greenland by the United States. But I
want to have immediate negotiations and
I want you Europeans to be compliant. He
said They have a choice. You can say yes
and we will be very appreciative. If we
can do a deal,
>> [music]
>> I'll be most appreciative. Or you can
say no. Or you can say no and we will
remember.
>> [music]
>> So it was a deeply unsettling and
menacing message delivered with Trump's
trademark mix of contempt and vitriol.
And so how is this speech received in
Davos? So what you see is that after a
very long period of trying to flatter
Trump, of trying to mollify Trump, of
trying to cajole Trump, European leaders
are now showing a bit more of a
willingness to stand up to him. They're
beginning to say, "No way. We won't
tolerate this. We won't accept it." And
that's a really, really fascinating
moment in the evolution of how foreign
leaders, particularly European leaders,
have dealt with President Trump. NATO
allies, in the words of one former
American diplomat, had gone through five
stages of grief with President Trump. It
began with denial right after he got
back into the White House. It
transitioned very quickly to anger,
perhaps after that terrible meeting that
uh Trump had with Volodymyr Zelenskyy of
Ukraine, shifted to bargaining,
continued into depression, and has
finally arrived at something approaching
acceptance.
And can you explain,
>> [clears throat]
>> Mark, why this is the thing that has
prompted that change? Why is this the
moment that leaders in Europe are
turning away from, as you said, the
strategy of kind of, you know, placating
Trump to now going much harder at him?
I think what it has to do with is the
fact that these leaders, who felt during
the period of time that they were
negotiating with President Trump over
tariffs, that there was a deal to be
done, that they could do business with
him, that they could get some of the
damage limited.
I think in this case they view this as
far more fundamental, far more
existential, and it's one in which they
felt [music]
they had to take a stand, they had to
draw a line. This is not open to
negotiation. This is a moment where you
have to stand up [music] for your
values.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Okay, Mark. So you just said that
America's allies essentially came to the
view that this Greenland issue was much
bigger than just Greenland itself. They
came to see this as something you
described as existential.
Just describe, if you can, why they view
these threats as such a fundamental
risk.
Because Europe really views the system
of international law, of a rules-based
order, as central to its existence, to
its economic prosperity, and frankly to
Western liberal democracy. All of that
is put at risk by having a sudden
rupture, a shattering, of this
rules-based order. And so what you saw
in Davos was a series of leaders
stepping up on the dais to sort of warn
about the costs of this and to begin to
talk about what they need to do to
respond to it. So you had President
Macron of France get up and talk about
how we prefer partners to bullies. And
most extraordinarily, you had Prime
Minister Mark Carney of Canada deliver,
I think, what's going to be remembered
for years as an extremely significant
speech. It seems that every day
we're reminded that we live in an era of
great power rivalry. In which he
described what's at stake in the loss of
the international order. For decades,
countries like Canada prospered under
what we called the rules-based
international order. And he went back
into history and described how this
order was set up, who it benefited, of
course principally the United States.
And American hegemony in particular
helped provide public goods,
open sea lanes, a stable financial
system. How there were elements of
dishonesty and hypocrisy to that system.
We knew the story of the international
rules-based order was partially false.
That the strongest would exempt
themselves when convenient. Which
nevertheless everybody went along with
because not only did the United States
benefit, but the smaller and middle
powers did too, both through the
economic ties that were generated by it
and crucially the protection it afforded
to the weaker states. And essentially
what Mark Carney said is Let me be
direct. We are in the midst of a
rupture, not a transition. That system
is over. That bargain no longer exists
between the great powers and the middle
powers. You cannot live within the lie
of mutual benefit through integration
when integration becomes the source of
your subordination. We now live in an
openly predatory world. The powerful
have their power.
We have something, too.
The capacity to stop pretending. And for
countries like Canada, like other
European countries, to survive in that
world, they're going to need to be much
more pragmatic, to some extent less
values-driven, willing to cut deals with
a greater number of actors, including
China.
That is Canada's path.
We choose it openly and confidently, and
it is a path wide open to any country
willing to take it with us.
Thank you very much.
>> [applause]
>> And so if Donald Trump, in his
characteristically
visceral way, was laying out the threat,
Mark Carney was supplying, in a deeply
articulate way, the response.
And the speech by Carney was especially
striking. Worth noting, it got a
standing ovation. But for the purposes
of understanding this moment,
essentially what Carney is saying is
that this fiction of a rules-based world
order is now over. The mask is off. The
hegemon that we've all been relying on,
the United States, is now essentially
turning against us. And so my question,
Mark, is in standing up to that hegemon,
what cards does the rest of NATO
actually have to play?
Well, this is, of course, the heart of
the matter. And on one level you have to
say they don't have a lot of cards. Were
the United States to launch an all-out
military assault on Greenland, there is
a 0% chance that Germany, France, the
United Kingdom, and Denmark are going to
go to war with the United States. Now,
remember, of course, President Trump
appeared to rule that out. But, you
know, with regard to other threats,
notably the threat in Ukraine, the
threat from Russia, you're already
beginning to see the outlines of that
kind of response. Germany has joined
France and the UK in building what they
call a coalition of the willing, a
proposal to send tens of thousands of
troops to Ukraine or around Ukraine to
help secure the country in the event of
a ceasefire with Russia.
You could see a series of smaller
alliances between Baltic countries or
between Mediterranean countries. So it
doesn't have the overarching feel of the
NATO alliance, but there are these more
piecemeal arrangements that countries
can make with each other, and I think
this is what Carney is talking about.
It's messier, it's riskier, it's more
expensive, but in this predatory world,
it may be the best that these middle
powers can hope for. Basically, you're
saying that one strategy would be for
these NATO countries to get themselves
in a position to eventually rely a lot
less on the United States when it comes
to security, especially with regard to
the threat from Russia. Obviously, that
would be a
That would take time to play out.
Generations. Europe, because it was
under this American security umbrella
since the end of World War II, would
have to take literally decades to build
up an independent security force that
had no reliance or little reliance on
the United States. And that would
involve extremely difficult decisions by
governments about how to spend public
resources. Remember, these are countries
that are used to generous social welfare
programs. Welfare programs that are
funded by governments that historically
did not have to spend as much on defense
and the military as the United States
did. So, that's on one level. On the
economic level, it is true that these
countries, at least in theory, do have
some leverage. On the trade front, for
example, the European Union can impose
uh what they call anti-coercion measures
against other countries, including the
United States. This is something that's
colloquially known as the bazooka. And
what is the bazooka exactly?
Well, so bazooka is basically a series
of very draconian measures that the
Europeans can impose on another country
that they think has hit them with unfair
trade practices. And of course, that
would be very painful for the many
American companies and investors that do
business in Europe. So, that is a form
of leverage, but there seems to be well
short of unanimity within the European
Union about using measures like that,
and that goes to what is the perennial
problem with Europe, which is achieving
enough unity around uh any of these
positions to make them truly effective
when you're facing, you know, a major
adversary like the United States.
And I presume also part of the reason
it's hard to get on the same page about
using what you called this economic
bazooka is that there's a risk to it.
There's a huge risk to it. At this
moment, Trump is saying he's not going
to impose the additional new tariffs he
had threatened.
But he goes back and forth on tariffs
all the time. So, if you were to impose
the bazooka on the United States, what's
to stop President Trump from imposing
100% tariffs or 150% tariffs, which
could have really calamitous
consequences for German car makers or
French luxury goods exporters? And
that's a real issue for these European
countries because these are politicians
dealing with their own domestic
pressures, and tanking your economy to
uh make a point with the United States
is not going to do you any favors at the
ballot box. And we should point out that
this whole time, there have also been
risks on the US side from this Greenland
gambit. We saw Wall Street didn't seem
to like this. There are Republican
senators that seem uncomfortable with
it. And I mean, let's be honest, it's
not like there's a huge hunger within
the American public to own Greenland.
So, taken all the things that you've
just described about the dangers for
Europe and the potential pitfalls for
the United States here,
it makes sense, actually, that both
sides had a real incentive to find an
off-ramp here, which is exactly what it
looked like they did just hours after
Trump gave that speech in Davos when he
and Mark Rutte come out and announce
that they've come to some sort of deal.
Yes, again, we don't know how solid this
off-ramp is
or what it entails as of Wednesday
evening, but yes, it does seem like
everybody backed off the edge of this
particular cliff.
But I have to ask, Mark, whatever this
deal or potential deal turns out to be,
doesn't this whole saga, this saga of
the US threatening to subsume territory
of another NATO state by force,
doesn't that make clear that NATO is
fundamentally rotten?
Like, this is an alliance that at its
core is supposed to be about protecting
each other from outside threats,
defending each other's sovereignty.
And this time, the threat came from
inside the family, one member against
the rest.
You just put your finger on it right
there. When the largest, the central,
the linchpin member of the alliance now
poses a direct threat to another member
of the alliance,
that fundamentally makes NATO no longer
tenable.
And so, I think you're right in saying
that even the fact that we're having
this conversation and that it's a
serious conversation and that leaders in
Europe are having to make decisions
based on the potential of an American
takeover of Greenland, that is already
deeply, deeply damaging to the
underlying principles of NATO.
And and so, while we've had this deal
today that perhaps postpones the moment
of reckoning, that gives NATO a sense of
preservation, it doesn't resolve or
change the underlying reality of what
happened here, which is that the
animating theories behind NATO have been
unraveled through this process. You
know, what's ironic about some of this
is that Trump's foreign policy, at one
point, seemed to be geared toward
persuading the rest of the world to
break its dependence on China. That was
the goal of the US's tariff war with
China and with a lot of what Trump was
doing on the global stage.
But now, it seems as though his brand of
foreign policy in term two
has actually had the effect of pushing
the world to break its dependence on the
United States, probably to China's
benefit. Is that the right assumption?
I mean, in a sense, what he's done is
driven these countries into the arms of
China. Because one thing that all of
these European and other middle power
countries are going to have to reckon
with is if they can't rely on the United
States, if you can't rely on being a
member of the American camp, you would
in a sense have to balance between the
great powers. And the great commercial
power, the great economic power of the
future is China. So, one of the things
that I think you will see much more of
is Europeans, the Canadians and others
going to China, fashioning deeper ties
with China, being more open to China.
And as you pointed out, that is
precisely what Trump set out to avoid,
and that's what successive American
administrations have always set as a as
a priority, which is to use our great
alliances, not just militarily, but
economically, and build this great
coalition that would be a proper
competitor for China. Now, you're going
to see countries, instead of saying,
"We're with the United States," they're
going to say, "Well, we're going to
balance our interests. We're going to
hedge against this uncertainty that we
now perceive in the United States, and
we're going to do it by drawing closer
to China." On the other hand, I have to
wonder whether there's some way that
Trump would actually see that outcome
that you're describing as a win for the
US. Like, he would have extended US
territory, demonstrated raw American
power, and, you know, pushing smaller
countries into the arms of China, he may
just view that as an inevitable result
of his quest to realize this worldview
that he has, which you, Mark, have
described on this show, that the great
powers should divide the globe into
these spheres of influence that they
dominate. Yeah, that's exactly right. I
think that in Trump's world, it's the
great powers that set the tone for
everybody else. I mean, there's a really
interesting saying by a Greek historian,
Thucydides. It's making the rounds a lot
these days, and it kind of encapsulates
Trump's philosophy, and it goes, "The
strong do what they can, while the weak
suffer what they must." And I think in
essence, what we're seeing over the last
few weeks most vividly, but it really
has been the story of Trump's second
term, is putting that ancient idea
into practice. He really does see three
major traditional great powers dividing
up the spoils, the United States,
Russia, and China. And Europe,
unhappily, finds itself wedged
uncomfortably between two of those major
great powers, but without some of the
key ingredients, the key weapons that
make one a great power, it has to kind
of navigate this rather dangerous and
unfriendly world making partnerships and
alliances where it can. And yet, at the
same time, I think we need to be careful
not to indulge in too much declinism.
The Europeans do have a future. It's a
future that will require them to make
some difficult choices, but will give
them a chance to become every bit as big
a sphere of influence as some of these
others. After all, remember Russia for
all of its saber-rattling is in in many
ways a weak country. And the Europeans
in this case seemed to get Trump to back
down.
Yeah, bully for them.
>> [music]
>> It seems like in a sense this was the
best scenario that one could have
imagined for this situation.
>> [music]
>> And it's also a reminder that Europe is
for all its weaknesses still a player.
They can still find ways to fend [music]
off the worst threats.
They have massive economies and educated
workforce,
diplomatic soft [music] power, powerful
cultural values.
>> [music]
>> In this new global order that Donald
Trump is creating, in this great global
game, I think writing off Europe today
would be [music] as big a mistake as it
would have been 200 years ago.
>> [music]
>> Mark,
thank you so much.
Thank you, Natalie.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
>> [music]
>> On Wednesday, the Supreme Court signaled
it was likely to reject President
Trump's effort to fire Federal Reserve
Board member Lisa Cook.
Trump announced [music] last summer that
he was going to remove Cook, claiming
she'd engaged in mortgage fraud.
Cook has [music] disputed the
allegations, and her lawyer has said
that the case was really an effort by
Trump to change the makeup of the Fed
and get the board to lower interest
rates faster.
>> [music]
>> But on that, your position that there's
uh no judicial review,
no process required, no remedy
available,
very low bar [music] for cause that the
president alone determines,
I mean, that would weaken if not shatter
the independence of the Federal Reserve
that we just discussed.
>> [music]
>> And during the oral arguments in the
case, the justices questioned whether
the allegations against Cook [music]
were serious enough to allow the
president to fire her. Let's talk about
the real-world downstream effects of
this, um
because if this were set as a precedent,
it seems to me,
just thinking big-picture,
we're really at at-will removal. So,
what are we doing here?
>> [music]
>> The court seemed likely to allow Cook to
keep her job for now, effectively
freezing the president's push [music] to
reshape the Fed.
And a House panel has voted to hold Bill
and Hillary Clinton in contempt [music]
of Congress for refusing to testify in
the Jeffrey Epstein investigation.
Nine Democrats voted with Republicans
[music] in an extraordinary first step
in referring the Clintons to the Justice
Department for prosecution.
The charges carry penalties of a steep
fine [music]
and imprisonment for up to a year.
The Clintons have offered to be
interviewed by the chair of the
oversight committee under oath, but have
refused to appear at a formal deposition
with the committee.
>> [snorts]
>> They've said the process is politically
motivated and designed [music] to result
in their imprisonment.
Today's episode was produced by Carlos
[music] Prieto, Claire Teylouni, and
Diana Wynn.
It was edited by Maria Byrne and Paige
Cowett. [music]
Contains music by Alicia Eubanks and
Marion Lozano, and was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff.
See you tomorrow.